We Begin the day with an offer and a
counter offer to stop the fighting in
Gaza two plans leading at least for now
nowhere this week a plan supported by
Egypt Qatar in the US calling for a
ceasefire in Gaza was presented to Hamas
the response to that plan was delivered
today to Israel a plan outlining how the
war in Gaza could end how the hostages
could be returned to Israel at the same
time leaving Hamas intact this evening
Israel's prime minister addressed the
nation and he said the Hamas plan was a
no-o and he vowed to keep fighting until
Hamas is no
more we are on our way to Absolute
Victory the victory is in our reach it's
not a matter of years or tens of years
it's a matter of
months continuous military pressure is
necessary to bring the hostages home
surrender to hamas's Preposterous
conditions we heard them not only will
not bring them home but will also bring
upon Israel another Massacre a disaster
no Israeli citizen is willing to
accept DW's Middle East analyst Shaunie
ranes is here at the big table with me
tonight she's been following us through
the evening as these developments are
presented to us we weren't surprised
that Netanyahu rejected this counter
offer from Hamas were you surprise
though that he said victory over Hamas
total Destruction is Within Reach just a
matter of months well it's been his line
for quite some time and he's also you
know he has you know if you look to
internal politics in Israel he needs to
boost up the soldiers he needs to show
the Israel determined also it's good for
the you know negotiations to toughen up
your position say we're going all the
way in because there's always a
suspicion that maybe Israeli military
and the Israeli public is getting a bit
tired there's somewhat of fatigue
there's a fear that maybe Hamas is
waiting you know to see Israel kind of
exhausted and netan needs to show that
they're not going to retreat anytime
soon you think that's setting in I mean
we aren't five months into this war now
oh there's no doubt we hear also from
the Israel military that it's it's
harder and harder even the forces that
have been you know uh withdrawn from
Gaza are not going home many of them are
going are deployed in the north uh in
the northern border so there's no doubt
that Israel is a functioning democracy a
functioning modern country cannot last
for too long in this War uh however you
know as long as the hostages uh
situation is still out there there's
also a wide uh support in the Israeli
public to keep on fighting the US secet
of State Anthony blink he just spent the
past few days trying to to to put
together to push this idea of a
ceasefire in Gaza here's what he had to
say about that take a listen we had an
opportunity today to discuss with the
Israeli government the response that
Hamas sent last night to the proposal
that the United States cutter and Egypt
had put together uh to bring the
remaining host's home and extend the
humanitarian pause um what I can tell
you about these discussions is that that
while there are some clear non-starters
in hamas's response uh we do think it
creates space for agreement to be
reached all right those last words there
Netanyahu rejected the plan today and
then we hear blinking saying there is
space for an agreement to be reached do
you know where that space is it's a very
narrow path but I think the main
contention point is the uh the demand of
Hamas to for Israel to to give it
consent to the end of the war well
Israel is willing to go for a deal only
with a suspension of the fire and if
Hamas and Israel will be willing to be a
bit more vague about the details of how
exactly the mechanism is going to work
because a big part of the deal was to
start negotiating the final terms after
the first immediate uh terms have been
accepted for the first 45 days of of of
secession of fire so as long as Israel
and Hamas will be willing to focus on
that first stage a bit like what we've
seen also in November in that deal that
we have seen back then if isra Hamas
will be willing to focus on that
immediate first phase maybe there is a
way and this is what the Americans are
hoping for to move forward without
really clearly asking Israel to to make
a commitment about the end of the war
and for Hamas maybe to accept that these
are like baby steps if you will correct
this is and the Americans feel like as
long as there's a process going and as
long as you know there's some sort of
momentum definitely the people of Gaza
need this relief you know um we've seen
blinkin in his talk put let great
emphasis on the dire condition in Gaza
the humanitarian needs and so on and
also the American pressure to give more
and more support to the Palestinians in
Gaza about the the American influence
there particularly with Israel um an
analyst earlier tonight told me that he
does not see the United States being
able to move Israel and my question is
if the United States can't do it is
there another Power then that would be
able to come in and bring change to this
impass do you see any other actor well
you know it's true that the Americans is
limited with their ability but they have
quite a lot of influence on Israel
Israel depends on them for military
supply first and foremost but far more
than that not to mention you know the
longlasting alliance throughout the
years netan what we're seeing in netan
is bringing more and more to the right
the weaker he gets in the base the
weaker the public support for him
diminishes you know the weaker he gets
the more he breaks to the right hoping
to clinch to power and that of course
puts him at odds with the American
government that wants him to be more
moderate to give more concessions it
could that what will be the first Domino
break to fall or to change things and
Israel would actually come from within
uh if the moderate forces in his Unity
Coalition if they will say we're not
willing to keep up with this anymore we
feel like you do more politics than
actually uh focusing on the goals of the
war that might be the first step to move
netan wasad to bring some sort of
Shuffle of of power within Israel for
the relief of the Americans but how much
pressure is there inside I'm talk about
domestic pressure on Netanyahu to to
bring you know to bring the hostages
home I mean to do something well the
great pressure you see there's a there's
a mass support for those hostages 136 of
them uh many people on the street know
their names know their their stories the
media deals with it quite extensively
but then at the same time as we were
mentioning Nan's weakness turn you know
he turns more and more to the right and
over there we're seeing a a growing Rift
between the right side of Israel saying
we need to keep on fighting to the
complete Victory as n was saying no
matter what and more moderate left
leaning uh which are not his base and
he's not caring for saying bring the
soldier bring the hostages now home
let's deal with Hamas later and that's
destabilizing Israel on the long term
then still doesn't find a way how to
make this all you know work and make
both goals of the war bringing the
hostages and defeating Kamas um
simultaneously work it doesn't seem to
be worth and it feels like time is
running out for that correct I mean it's
been four months exactly today and
patience is running out all right Sha
ranas as always sha we appreciate you
here Studio appreciate your analysis
thank you all right I want to pull in
now Simon Maan he is a lecturer in
international relations from Lancaster
University in the UK it's good to see
you again Simon let let me just ask you
considering that this counter offer that
came from Hamas basically would have
left Hamas intact inside of Gaza I mean
did Israel or did Netanyahu really have
any other choice but to reject
it not really given what he's been
saying for the past 115 or so days he's
taken a very very hard line on Hamas and
hamas's continued presence in Gaza and
to go back on that stance to reject his
position of saying that they cannot
fathom a Gaza or cannot tolerate a Gaza
with a Hamas presence would be
unfathomable for him and that would have
serious consequences for his political
Capital within Israel itself so there's
a lot at stake for him what does this
rejection by Israel what does it mean
for its relations with the United States
and I ask that considering the top
Diplomat from the US the Secretary of
State Anthony blinkin he has just spent
the last three or four days in the
region yet again trying to push this
idea of a
ceasefire I think it puts further
pressure on an already fraud already
tense relationship between the two
countries and we know that it's been
incredibly tense ever since the the
devastating attacks of October 7 both
States face a huge number of domestic
pressures that are manifesting and
shaping their country's foreign policies
and in Israel's case it's policy towards
both the US and towards Gaza and I think
what the the latest round of shuttle
diplomacy from Mr blinkin demonstrates
is that us abilities US influence in the
region really is on the
Wayne and we understand that there are
going to be further negotiations
expected in Cairo next week what should
we expect there Simon and is it is it am
I being a cynic here or a pessimist when
I say that um many people are not
expecting any diplomatic breakthroughs
there
either it's hard not to be cynical in
light of everything that's happened in
light of continued diplomatic failings
in light of a seemingly intractable
political and diplomatic position taken
by the various actors involved here so I
think your cynicism is perhaps
appropriate sadly um something needs to
happen to get a diplomatic breakthrough
there needs to be one for huge numbers
of people the huge numbers of
humanitarian reasons that that are
manifesting in Gaza it is a devastating
situation there it's a devastating
situation for Israelis whose families
continue to be held hostage breakthrough
is needed I'm not sure that the US is
the one to facilitate that breakthrough
and I'm not sure we're going to get it
in Cairo next week either do you do you
see then another power that would be
able to facilitate that breakthrough I
me considering that what you say we've
heard from other analysts as well is
that the influence of the US with Israel
appears to be somewhat
eroded yeah I think we've seen uh Mr
blinkin pushing very hard
over the past three months to try and
get some type of diplomatic resolution
to to the the situation there and so far
he's been unable to get anything really
off the ground so I think what we're
doing now is we're looking for other
Alternatives we're looking for someone
to step up whether that be Qatar whether
that be China whether that be the UK
someone perhaps even Germany to step up
and say this situation cannot continue
it cannot continue in its current for
there is too much human suffering on all
sides and there has to be a resolution
Simon May joining us tonight from
Lancaster University excellent analysis
we appreciate it Simon thank
you thank
you